# Smart-Object-Detection-Glasses-for-the-Visually-Impaired
Developed an AI-Powered wearable device for visually impaired users to detect objects and people in real-time.

This project is essentially, Smart Object Detection for the Visually Impaired. As the name suggests, I used AI-powered Object Detection and special code to detect objects in view of the camera, which the speaker then says out loud. 

The system uses a camera and motion detection to identify objects around the user. The code runs on a Raspberry Pi, using an AI-powered YOLO-based object detection model. I used caches (information storage modules, it has about 250 everyday objects) full of previously identified objects so it can maximize the speed, efficiency, and accuracy in detecting objects. Once the camera detects an object with sufficient confidence, it announces the object out loud using text-to-speech, so the user knows what’s around them, and this works with both stationary and non-stationary objects. There is also an on/off switch, and a ten-second cooldown between repeating the same object names. to prevent redundancy. The wearable, compact design of the glasses makes it practical for everyday use, and the integration of object detection, motion sensing, and multi-modal alerts (auditory feedback and buzzers) provides a comprehensive solution that improves the safety and quality of life for visually impaired individuals.

As part of the research behind this project, I was inspired by the growing inequality in care for individuals with visual impairments. Based on data that I collected from the ‘American Foundation for the Blind’ and ‘The Sonic Eyewear Project,’ I wanted to build something practical. The glasses I made use an ergonomic design, are comfortable, and provide alerts. I also integrated facial recognition, in which the user inputs a picture, the AI memorizes that face and detects it, allowing for better social interactions and day-to-day conversations. Along with YOLO Object Detection, I also looked into other types of sources such as SSD (Single Shot Detection) and using other types of Hardware materials such as an Ultrasonic Sensor, however I decided to implement easy-to-use and free versions to make this product cost-effective.

To summarize, this project is about empowering visually impaired individuals to navigate their environment as well introducing the implementation of multi-modal alerts in a compact wearable device. Unlike existing systems, the main purpose of my project was to provide a single method of alerting the user by combining object identification, motion detection, and auditory feedback through both speech and a buzzer, making the navigation process safer. The whole setup runs efficiently, and includes a buzzer for immediate alerts if needed. The result is a system that not only tells the user what objects are nearby, but also provides them with alerts when movement is detected. Some constraints with the Prototype include it being too heavy and it not being as user-friendly as I had originally hoped. However, I was still satisfied that this product could meet all the necessary requirements/goals and pass all the test trials
